ROADMAP.md update for stages and forward view (#2913)
vmware-tanzu/community-edition: ROADMAP.md

#VMware Tanzu Community Edition High-Level Roadmap

##About this Document

This document provides an overview of the major themes driving Tanzu Community Edition development, as well as constituent features and capabilities. Roadmap items are tracked by their implementation state within the enhancements proposal process: Awaiting Proposal, Proposal in Review, and Implementation in Progress. Most items are gathered from the community or include a feedback loop with the community. 

> This roadmap should serve as a reference point for Tanzu Community Edition users to help us prioritize existing features and provide input on unmet needs, and for contributors to understand where the project is heading. A roadmap also helps our contributor community to determine if a proposed enhancement conflicts with the long term plan.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This roadmap should serve as a reference point for Tanzu Community Edition users to help us prioritize existing features and provide input on unmet needs, and for contributors to understand where the project is heading. A roadmap also helps our contributor community to determine if a proposed enhancement conflicts with the long-term plan.
```

||Work to reduce time to cluster availability on vSphere and public clouds (Cluster API v1.1
Proposal)|Awaiting Proposal|TBD|
||Make management clusters registerable in Tanzu Mission Control|Implementation in progress|v0.11|0.3 months|
||Introduce a UI that takes a user from installation through creating clusters to installing packages on clusters. Embed documentation and guidance throughout so that users can be successful exclusively through this tooling.|Awaiting Proposal|TBD||
||Expose Cluster API (capi)-provider bootstrapping details, client-side, to users when creating management and workload clusters. Provides users an understanding of where bootstrapping failures occurred.|Awaiting Proposal (see: https://github.com/vmware-tanzu/community-edition/issues/2730)|TBD||
|Robust Kubernetes platform|Limited-internet (including airgapped) support|Awaiting Proposal|TBD||
||Validate and improve end-to-end tests across all supported infrastructure providers.|Awaiting proposal|TBD||
|Rich package library|Work with community to solicit and prioritize desired packages||0-3 months|

> ||Pursue community and ISV package lifecycle and configuration integrations via Carvel and Tanzu Framework|n/aongoing||

Reviewer: ```suggestion
||Pursue community and ISV package lifecycle and configuration integrations via Carvel and Tanzu Framework|ongoing||
```

> |Positioning Community |dition as leading-edge upstream for Tanzu products|Community Edition produces its own Bill of Materials (BOM), Tanzu Kubernetes Release (TKr), OCI container images, host images,and packages for CLI plugins and in-cluster software|Awaiting Proposals|TBD||

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Positioning Community Edition as leading-edge upstream for Tanzu products|Community Edition produces its own Bill of Materials (BOM), Tanzu Kubernetes Release (TKr), OCI container images, host images,and packages for CLI plugins and in-cluster software|Awaiting Proposals|TBD||
```

Author: Edited.

> |Positioning Community |dition as leading-edge upstream for Tanzu products|Community Edition produces its own Bill of Materials (BOM), Tanzu Kubernetes Release (TKr), OCI container images, host images,and packages for CLI plugins and in-cluster software|Awaiting Proposals|TBD||

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Positioning Community |dition as leading-edge upstream for Tanzu products|Community Edition produces its own Bill of Materials (BOM), Tanzu Kubernetes Release (TKr), OCI container images, host images, and packages for CLI plugins and in-cluster software|Awaiting Proposals|TBD||
```

> |Application Platform|Installable package is made available containing pre-configured, minimally-viable, platform services that enable developers to run their software (contour, kpack, cert-manager, ?, ?)|Awaiting proposal|Implementation in Progress Proposal: (TODO: tracker proposal for all components)| Beginning in v0.10; please see [add issue once available]|0-3 monthsand 3-6 months|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Application Platform|Installable package is made available containing pre-configured, minimally-viable, platform services that enable developers to run their software (contour, kpack, cert-manager, ?, ?)|Awaiting proposal|Implementation in Progress Proposal: (TODO: tracker proposal for all components)| Beginning in v0.10; please see [add issue once available]|0-3 months and 3-6 months|
```

# VMware Tanzu Community Edition High-Level Program Roadmap

## About this Document

This document provides an overview of the major themes driving Tanzu Community Edition program development, as well as constituent features and capabilities. Roadmap items are tracked by their implementation stage within the enhancements proposal process: Awaiting Proposal, Proposal in Review, and Implementation in Progress. The stages are documented below. Most items are gathered from the community or include a feedback loop with the community.

> The scope of this roadmap is the entire Tanzu Community Edition program, which includes this GitHub project repository, the [Tanzu Framework](https://github.com/vmware-tanzu/tanzu-framework) project frepository, the project repositories for packages delivered as part of Tanzu Comm unity Edition, and non-code program aspects such as videos, training materials, and community activities.

Author: Fixed.

| Positioning Community Edition as leading-edge upstream for Tanzu products | Community Edition produces its own Bill of Materials (BOM), Tanzu Kubernetes Release (TKr), OCI container images, host images, and packages for CLI plugins and in-cluster software | Awaiting Proposals | TBD |
| Application Platform | Installable package is made available containing pre-configured, minimally-viable, platform services that enable developers to run their tools and apps (contour, kpack, cert-manager, knative serving, Cartographer, etc.) | Implementation in Progress (TODO: tracker proposal for all components) | Beginning in v0.10; please see issue (in dev) |
| | Tools and processes for package contribution, maintenance, and installation | Awaiting Proposal | TBD |
| | Package maintainer documentation and guidance is live such that everyone can understand the responsibilities of being a package maintainer | Awaiting Proposal | TBD |
| |Provide guidance on bringing new provider packages to TCE; enabling the inclusion of new infrastructure providers | Awaiting Proposal (dependent on Tanzu Kubernetes Provider implementation) | TBD |

> | |Introduce kubeapps to TCE for discovery and installation of packages from Bitnami library [(issue)](https://github.com/vmware-tanzu/community-edition/issues/2418) | Awaiting Proposal | TBD |

Reviewer 2: Thought I had made this comment earlier, but this bitnami goal seems to be in opposition to this goal:

> Pursue community and ISV package lifecycle and configuration integrations via Carvel and Tanzu Framework

Won't introducing another packaging paradigm create fracture the packaging community and make it _more_ difficult to get started easily with packages and a full running platform? Yes, we have many existing assets in the Bitnami library, but in my eyes, it's risky introducing them as an _alternative_ to our established packaging philosophy.

Further, does this create the expectation that _maintainers_ of packages maintain _both_ their carvel package _and_ the bitmani chart? If I'm the packaging dev for prometheus, this seems like extra work when I've potentially already created automation, tooling, and workflows for the carvel packaging set.

I'd love @seemiller's perspective on this too.

Author: There are many packages in Bitnami that are not in our repos. And they are duplicating packages in Carvel tooling.  At this point there is very little overlap, and we should advise users to search the TCE repo before Kubeapps.

Enhancement stages help everyone understand if something is in the early stages of an idea or if it has wider community buy-in and committed resources. This is important because it helps limit waste, and focus work on the most important and timely activities. The stages are described below:

* Awaiting Proposal - these enhancements are in the idea mode, and the project maintainers are awaiting a detailed proposal. This state is useful to explore different solutions to a known problem and encourage discussion.
* Proposal in Review - maintainers are currently reviewing the proposal, which includes resource requirements and commitments.
* Implementation in Progress - engineering work has begun and will be tracking towards a release target.

## How to help

If you'd like to contribute but don't have anything to propose, check out our [issues](https://github.com/vmware-tanzu/community-edition/issues) for issues tagged
[help-wanted](https://github.com/vmware-tanzu/community-edition/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+label%3Ahelp-wanted) or
[good-first-issue](https://github.com/vmware-tanzu/community-edition/labels/good-first-issue).

> You can participate in discussion on the roadmap in threads under Issues and in sdcheduled roadmap serssions in community meetings. Questions may also be brought up in our Google Group or our Slack channel. Community members are encouraged to be actively involved, and also stay informed so contributions can be made with the most positive effect and limited duplication of effort.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can participate in discussion on the roadmap in threads under Issues and in scheduled roadmap sessions in community meetings. Questions may also be brought up in our Google Group or our Slack channel. Community members are encouraged to be actively involved, and also stay informed so contributions can be made with the most positive effect and limited duplication of effort.
```

## About this Document

This document provides an overview of the major themes driving Tanzu Community Edition development, as well as constituent features and capabilities. Roadmap items are tracked by their implementation state within the enhancements proposal process: Awaiting Proposal, Proposal in Review, and Implementation in Progress. Most items are gathered from the community or include a feedback loop with the community.

> This roadmap should serve as a reference point for Tanzu Community Edition users to help us prioritize existing features and provide input on unmet needs, and for contributors to understand where the project is heading. A roadmap also helps our contributor community to determine if a proposed enhancement conflicts with the long-term plan.

Reviewer 3: >  A roadmap also helps our contributor community to determine if a proposed enhancement conflicts with the long-term plan.

I can't make sense of what this means.

Author: If we said we plan to do X, if a contributor is thinking they want to contribute opposite-of-X, the roadmap will tell them it is un likely to be accepted.

Reviewer 3: New working of:

```
Contributors can also consult the roadmap when thinking of proposing new ideas, to determine if their idea conflicts with the roadmap; in that case, the team and community will need to determine whether to adjust the roadmap or to recommend changes to the idea.
```

seems far more clear. Thanks for resolving this!

> This roadmap should serve as a reference point for Tanzu Community Edition users to help us prioritize existing features and provide input on unmet needs, and for contributors to understand where the project is heading. Contributors can also consult the roadmap when thinking of proposing new ideas, to determine if their idea conflicts with the roadmap; in that case, the team and community will need to determine whether to adjust the roadmap or to recommend changes to the idea.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This roadmap should serve as a reference point for Tanzu Community Edition users to help us prioritize existing features, provide input on unmet needs, and for contributors to understand where the project is heading. Contributors can also consult the roadmap when thinking of proposing new ideas and determine if their idea conflicts with the roadmap. If it does conflict, the team and community will need to determine whether to adjust the roadmap or to recommend changes to the idea.
```

> Enhancement states help everyone understand if something is in the early stages of an idea or if it has wider community buy-in and committed resources. This is important because it helps limit waste, and focus work on the most important and timely activities. The stages are described below:

Reviewer 3: Recommend rewording this paragraph, it reads really weird.

Also, not sure there should be a command between `limit waste` and `and focus work`?

Reviewer 2: Agreed ^ I'm not sure what `Enhancement states` are

> .Awaiting Proposal - these enhancements are in the idea mode, and the project maintainers are awaiting a detailed proposal. This state is useful to explore different solutions to a known problem and encourage discussion.

Reviewer 3: What is this `.` notation? Also these are are being formatted as a single paragraph. Did you mean to make this a bulleted list?

You can check your formatting by viewing the file in GitHub.

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6200057/151604359-251f07db-856a-4239-9831-211094d74096.png)

Author: Yes, it came from a "how to MD" doc but apparently an incorrect one...

Reviewer 3: Looks great now, thanks for resolving this.

.Proposal in Review - maintainers are currently reviewing the proposal, which includes resource requirements and commitments.
.Implementation in Progress - engineering work has begun and will be tracking towards a release target.

## How to help

> Discussion on the roadmap can take place in threads under Issues or in community meetings, our Google Group, or our Slack channel. Please open and comment on an issue if you want to provide suggestions for feedback on  an item in the roadmap.  Community members are encouraged to be actively involved, and also stay informed so contributions can be made with the most positive effect and limited duplication of effort.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Discussion on the roadmap can take place in threads under Issues or in community meetings, our Google Group, or our Slack channel. Please open and comment on an issue if you want to provide suggestions for feedback on an item in the roadmap.  Community members are encouraged to be actively involved, and also stay informed so contributions can be made with the most positive effect and limited duplication of effort.
```

Author: Edits made manually.

> Discussion on the roadmap can take place in threads under Issues or in community meetings, our Google Group, or our Slack channel. Please open and comment on an issue if you want to provide suggestions for feedback on  an item in the roadmap.  Community members are encouraged to be actively involved, and also stay informed so contributions can be made with the most positive effect and limited duplication of effort.

Reviewer 3: `and also` reads weird.

Author: Rewritten.

> Discussion on the roadmap can take place in threads under Issues or in community meetings, our Google Group, or our Slack channel. Please open and comment on an issue if you want to provide suggestions for feedback on  an item in the roadmap.  Community members are encouraged to be actively involved, and also stay informed so contributions can be made with the most positive effect and limited duplication of effort.

Reviewer 3: I also recommend re-working this paragraph. It doesn't read well (to me)

Author: Rerwritten.

> Discussion on the roadmap can take place in threads under Issues or in community meetings, our Google Group, or our Slack channel. Please open and comment on an issue if you want to provide suggestions for feedback on  an item in the roadmap.  Community members are encouraged to be actively involved, and also stay informed so contributions can be made with the most positive effect and limited duplication of effort.

Reviewer 2: > Discussion on the roadmap can take place in threads under Issues or in community meetings, our Google Group, or our Slack channel

This seems really ambiguous to me. If I'm a new contributor, or even an existing contributor, it's overwhelming to be expected to track and communicate within so many different avenues without clear direction.

Should we make a recommendation on the _preferred_ communication channel?

i.e.

```diff
- Discussion on the roadmap can take place in threads under Issues or in community meetings, our Google Group, or our Slack channel
+ Discussion on the roadmap should take place in threads under Issues. Although we welcome discussion in community meetings, our Google Group, or our Slack channel.
```

Author: Updated.

## How to add an item to the roadmap

> Please open an issue to track any initiative on the roadmap (usually driven by new feature requests). We will work with and rely on our community to focus our efforts to improve Tanzu Community Edition.

Reviewer 3: I don't understand this. Is it about "requesting a new item to be on the roadmap"? Like the title says?\

It says: "open an issue **to track any initiative on the roadmap**" <-- implies it pre-exists, right?

## Current High-Level Roadmap

> The following table includes the current roadmap for Tanzu Community Edition. If you have any questions or would like to contribute, please attend a community meeting to discuss with our team. If you don't know where to start, we are always looking for contributors that will help us reduce technical, automation, and documentation debt. Please take the timelines and dates as proposals and goals. Priorities and requirements change based on community feedback, roadblocks encountered, community contributions, etc. If you depend on a specific item, we encourage you to attend community meetings to get updated status information, or help us deliver that feature by contributing to Tanzu Community Edition.

Reviewer 3: These paragraph feels like a re-hash of a bunch of detail covered throughout this doc already.

Reviewer 2: ^ +1

> Last Updated:  January 2022

Reviewer 3: Please update to Feb.

tbh, not sure why this is needed considering there is commit history, but if we keep it, please update to feb.

> | Theme | Feature | Status (Phase) | Targeted Release |

Reviewer 4: You're missing the separator line after the header columns.

https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/writing-on-github/working-with-advanced-formatting/organizing-information-with-tables#creating-a-table

| Build user community | Reward community support | n/a | ongoing |

> | |Community roadmap prioritization| | n/a | ongoing |

Reviewer 4: There are five columns defined here, but only four for the table.

> | Build user community | Reward community support | n/a | ongoing |

Reviewer 3: :-1: to this as a roadmap item.

it doesn't benefit users of the project, it's not measurable, and feels like either an internal detail or random filler.

Reviewer 5: Agreed. This doesnt pertain to the work/tasks needing to be done in this repo. This should be a goal on an internal tracker like something for community management.

Reviewer 2: ^ +1 - Building a user community is inherent in a community driven project; I'm not sure how you measure, define success, or re-evaluate failure.

Author: I've talked it over with others too - let's remove it and be sure we track it in the program.

Author: Removed.

> | |Community roadmap prioritization | n/a | ongoing |

Reviewer 3: This is a roadmap item? Isn't this what the roadmap is?

Author: Nigel's activities. (In this case, the activity is to hand out swag for attendance and contribution.) Marketing activities. Follow-up to conversations that draw people (obviously not too effectively so far) to the channels and meetings. At the program level, deliverables are not all code and docs.

Reviewer 4: Said another way, it doesn't make sense for a user to read the roadmap to see what's coming up and think something like "great, I can't wait for the v0.12.0 release when we get a community". This just seems like a very odd thing to have on a roadmap. A personal or team goal planning, sure. But a roadmap not so much.

Author: Yes, I get your point. In the previous version, this was one of several items in this category, so "Reward participation" as an activity made more sense in context. It also included several dev advocacy and technical marketing activities aimed at building the community. The content plan has not yet been approved by the program - it has, I think, by marketing - so I was asked to drop those items. I could drop the whole category till those things are approved, but since the (potential) community is one of the things we talk about a lot when we present TCE to Tanzu customers, press, analysts, etc. the general category should probably remain - we can revise to add the other deliverables as soon as the plan is approved. But I will discuss it with People Above My Head and see what they think.

Author: Removed.

> | Enhance cloud-native user experience for skilled and new users | Unmanaged-cluster model introduced to enable minimal-cluster deployments in under 4 minutes that can run on consumer hardware. | Implementation in Progress | v0.11 |

Reviewer 3: :+1: really love this one. (just positive feedback, feel free to close)

Reviewer 4: Do we want it to say v0.11? The current plan is to include it in the v0.10.0 release, correct?

Reviewer 2: Un-resolved this one since it still looks like it's marked for v0.11?

Author: Unmanaged now says 0.10.

> Proposal) | Awaiting Proposal | TBD |

Reviewer 4: Line breaks in the middle of a row aren't handled well by the markdown parsers.

> | | Make management clusters registerable in Tanzu Mission Control | Implementation in progress | v0.11 |

Reviewer 3: From what i've read of this doc, it feels like Implementation in progress implies an issue exists and proposal is accepted. I haven't seen this?

Reviewer 2: > management clusters registerable

Is this work that the TCE team can execute against? The `management-cluster` plugin and core functionality for management clusters is owned by `tanzu-framework`

> | | Work to reduce time to cluster availability on vSphere and public clouds (Cluster API v1.1 Proposal) | Awaiting Proposal | TBD |

Author: I have moved this item to an Other Areas To Explore section below the table.

> | | Introduce a UI that takes a user from installation through creating clusters to installing packages on clusters. Embed documentation and guidance throughout so that users can be successful exclusively through this tooling. | Awaiting Proposal | TBD |

Reviewer 3: +1 really love this one. (just positive feedback, feel free to close/resolve)

> | | Expose Cluster API (capi)-provider bootstrapping details, client-side, to users when creating management and workload clusters. Provides users an understanding of where bootstrapping failures occurred. | Awaiting Proposal [(issue)](https://github.com/vmware-tanzu/community-edition/issues/2730 ) | TBD |

Reviewer 3: +1 really love this one. (just positive feedback, feel free to close/resolve)

|Robust Kubernetes platform | Limited-internet (including airgapped) support | Awaiting Proposal | TBD |
| | Validate and improve end-to-end tests across all supported infrastructure providers. | Awaiting proposal | TBD |
| Rich package library | Work with community to solicit and prioritize desired packages| n/a |ongoing |
| | Pursue community and ISV package lifecycle and configuration integrations via Carvel and Tanzu Framework | n/a | ongoing |

> | Positioning Community rdition as leading-edge upstream for Tanzu products | Community Edition produces its own Bill of Materials (BOM), Tanzu Kubernetes Release (TKr), OCI container images, host images, and packages for CLI plugins and in-cluster software | Awaiting Proposals | TBD |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Positioning Community Edition as leading-edge upstream for Tanzu products | Community Edition produces its own Bill of Materials (BOM), Tanzu Kubernetes Release (TKr), OCI container images, host images, and packages for CLI plugins and in-cluster software | Awaiting Proposals | TBD |
```

> | Positioning Community Edition as leading-edge upstream for Tanzu products | Community Edition produces its own Bill of Materials (BOM), Tanzu Kubernetes Release (TKr), OCI container images, host images, and packages for CLI plugins and in-cluster software | Awaiting Proposals | TBD |

Reviewer 5: Currently, I think plans are being developed in Tanzu Framework and by said team. If that happens to be the case, I think we should call out that we are consumers of this feature and we should link to the proposal and again note the work isn't done in this repo.

Author: @dvonthenen please Slack me when you get this comment. :)

| Application Platform | Installable package is made available containing pre-configured, minimally-viable, platform services that enable developers to run their tools and apps (contour, kpack, cert-manager, knative serving, Cartographer, etc.) | Implementation in Progress (TODO: tracker proposal for all components) | Beginning in v0.10; please see issue (in dev) |

> | | Tools and processes for package contribution, maintenance, and installation; Package maintainer documentation and guidance is live such that everyone can understand the responsibilities of being a package maintainer | Awaiting Proposal | TBD |

Reviewer 6: Nit: I think this could be two rows for `Tools and processes...` and `Package maintainer documentation...` for clarity.

Author: Changed as noted.

| |Provide guidance on bringing new provider packages to TCE; enabling the inclusion of new infrastructure providers | Awaiting Proposal (dependent on Tanzu Kubernetes Provider implementation) | TBD |

> | |Introduce kubeapps to TCE for discovering and installation packages in Bitnami library [(issue)](https://github.com/vmware-tanzu/community-edition/issues/2418) | Awaiting Proposal | TBD |

Reviewer 2: Doesn't this conflict with this goal?

> Pursue community and ISV package lifecycle and configuration integrations via Carvel and Tanzu Framework

If we introduced the kubeapps bitnami library, wouldn't that fracture our package eco-system and make installing / maintaining packages _more_ challenging for users and maintainers?

> | Better defined LCM Cluster API extensibility points |Build the Runtime Extension SDK in Cluster API for ClusterClass patching, pre/post control plane upgrade hooks | Awaiting proposal | TBD |

Reviewer 3: Trying to understand how this is part of the TCE roadmap.

Is the PM suggestion that the TCE team works on this upstream? Specifically we want the TCE project to "Build the Runtime Extension SDK in Cluster API for ClusterClass patching" ?

Reviewer 4: LCM should also be spelled out.

Author: Moved to Exploration out of table.

> | Accelerate time to bootstrap Cluster API management clusters | Re-evaluate the Cluster API bootstrapping process to use `kcp-dev` (idea) | Awaiting proposal | TBD |

Reviewer 3: In the upper part of the ROADMAP doc, it implies `Awaiting Proposal` is still in ideation. Do we need to say this is an "(idea), here?

> | Accelerate time to bootstrap Cluster API management clusters | Re-evaluate the Cluster API bootstrapping process to use `kcp-dev` (idea) | Awaiting proposal | TBD |

Author: That's great - I didn't write it in - I thought you did, on the Google Doc.

> | Accelerate time to bootstrap Cluster API management clusters | Re-evaluate the Cluster API bootstrapping process to use `kcp-dev` (idea) | Awaiting proposal | TBD |

Reviewer 3: I did not write this in. Thanks for changing the wording.

> | Accelerate time to bootstrap Cluster API management clusters | Consider more efficient and resource-saving methods to bootstrap | Awaiting proposal | TBD |

Reviewer 2: I don't understand this one.

Are we saying that the TCE team should execute against the `Cluster-API` library (aka, make upstream contributions) in order to make the bootstrapping of a Cluster API management cluster faster?

Or is this work that `tanzu-framework` needs to execute against in order to speed up the process of bootstrapping a management cluster? (this makes the most sense to me since they are pulling in that library and harnessing the bootstraping capabilities of Cluster API)

Or is this saying that we _completely reconsider_ using Cluster API in order to find "more efficient and resource-saving methods to bootstrap"?

## About this Document

This document provides an overview of the major themes driving Tanzu Community Edition program development, as well as constituent features and capabilities. Roadmap items are tracked by their implementation stage within the enhancements proposal process: Awaiting Proposal, Proposal in Review, and Implementation in Progress. The stages are documented below. Most items are gathered from the community or include a feedback loop with the community.

> The scope of this roadmap is the entire Tanzu Community Edition program, which includes this GitHub project repository, the [Tanzu Framework](https://github.com/vmware-tanzu/tanzu-framework) project frepository, the project repositories for packages delivered as part of Tanzu Comm unity Edition, and non-code program aspects such as videos, training materials, and community activities.

Reviewer 7: > The scope of this roadmap is the entire Tanzu Community Edition program, which includes this GitHub project repository, the **Tanzu Framework project repository**

Emphasis mine. Does this mean we are claiming and owning the roadmap for Framework?

| Positioning Community Edition as leading-edge upstream for Tanzu products | Community Edition produces its own Bill of Materials (BOM), Tanzu Kubernetes Release (TKr), OCI container images, host images, and packages for CLI plugins and in-cluster software | Awaiting Proposals | TBD |
| Application Platform | Installable package is made available containing pre-configured, minimally-viable, platform services that enable developers to run their tools and apps (contour, kpack, cert-manager, knative serving, Cartographer, etc.) | Implementation in Progress (TODO: tracker proposal for all components) | Beginning in v0.10; please see issue (in dev) |
| | Tools and processes for package contribution, maintenance, and installation; Package maintainer documentation and guidance is live such that everyone can understand the responsibilities of being a package maintainer | Awaiting Proposal | TBD |
| |Provide guidance on bringing new provider packages to TCE; enabling the inclusion of new infrastructure providers | Awaiting Proposal (dependent on Tanzu Kubernetes Provider implementation) | TBD |

> | |Introduce kubeapps to TCE for discovering and installation packages in Bitnami library [(issue)](https://github.com/vmware-tanzu/community-edition/issues/2418) | Awaiting Proposal | TBD |

Reviewer 4: "for discovering and installation packages in Bitnami library" should be "for discovering and installing packages from the Bitnami library" or "for the discovery and installation of packages from the Bitnami library".

| Better defined lifecycle management Cluster API extensibility points |Build the Runtime Extension SDK in Cluster API for ClusterClass patching, pre/post control plane upgrade hooks | Awaiting proposal | TBD |

> | Accelerate time to bootstrap Cluster API management clusters | Consider more efficient and resource-saving methods to bootstrap | Awaiting proposal | TBD |

Reviewer 7: I'm not following why this theme is separate from `Enhance cloud-native user experience for skilled and new users`, which includes a faster setup time for unmanaged clusters.

In my mind, these are similar or the same, but perhaps I'm missing something.
